docs: update collator docusaurus (#25)
KILTprotocol/docs: docs/chain/collator.md

:::danger

Be aware that it is highly discouraged to publicly expose an RPC endpoint, especially if it allows the execution of unsafe RPC calls!
You should be the only one able to call the RPC endpoint.
For a secure setup, follow the instructions in the section about [generating the session keys](#generating-session-keys).

:::

#### WASM runtime execution

A KILT collator should use the `--execution=wasm` parameter for both the relaychain and parachain collation.
The alternative to WASM runtime execution is native runtime execution, which might be faster but can, in some cases, deviate from the WASM execution logic and result in a different state.
When this happens the collator will crash and will stop producing blocks.
Since the WASM runtime logic is part of the blockchain state itself and hence represents the single source of truth, all collators should execute the WASM version of the runtime logic.

#### Peregrine and Spiritnet chain specs

The `--chain` parameter decides which blockchain the KILT collator will join.
We need to pass this parameter to the parachain and the relaychain, since both chains are separate blockchains.

> The KILT parachain accepts an additional runtime parameter to select which runtime is executed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The KILT parachain accepts an additional runtime parameter to select which runtime environment is used to executed the WASM runtime.
```

This can either be `peregrine` or `spiritnet`.
For now this parameter is not required, since both runtimes are very similar and can run in the same environment, but it is safer to provide it already now.

#### Where are all the files stored?

The `--base-path` parameter configures where all the persistent files are written.
By default the session keys will also be stored in the *base path*, but we recommend to separate them from the other files.
This makes sure that the keyfiles are not accidentally lost or published when the blockchain database is backed up or restored.
You can configure where to store the session keys using the `--keystore-path` option.
Since the collator will collate only for the parachain, there is no need to add this to the relaychain part of the command.

### Run a Peregrine collator

<Tabs
  groupId="exec-strategy"
  defaultValue="Docker"
  values={[

>     {label: 'Binary', value: 'Binary'},

Reviewer: The Docker option doesn't use a binary? I prefer native since that's the difference in my opinion.

Author: For me it was confusing as we are not running the native runtime, bus still running the wasm version. Or maybe I got it wrong and Native indicates that the native runtime version is used? Maybe binary is not the best word choice, but I think neither is native if we then use `--execution=wasm`.

Reviewer: Ok yes didn't see that it's overloaded with the native runtime vs wasm runtime. good point. Leave it like it is...

    {label: 'Docker', value: 'Docker'},
  ]}>
<TabItem value="Binary">

We recommend following the instructions in the [KILT chain repository](https://github.com/KILTprotocol/mashnet-node).
Below is the command to build the KILT collator executable for the Peregrine network. The command must be run from the root directory of the repository after it has been cloned.

:::info

> We discourage to use the `develop` branch to build the executable. Instead, the last released version should be used.

Reviewer: Not sure about that. It only matters if they use the native runtime.

Author: So the question is: what message to we want to convey here? That `master` should not be used, like it was before, or that it is, on the contrary, preferable even though not required?

Reviewer: Ah right! I didn't notice the part about master. Yes so they could use both. But we might want to tell them to only use master.

Author: So `master` or the latest release?

Reviewer: master i would say

    --execution=wasm
```

If the node needs to be reachable via PolkadotJS Apps, the `--ws-external` flag must be added to the collator options, before the `--` divider, and the WS port must be exposed from the container with an additional `-p 9944:9944` parameter.

The docker command will map the database files for the relay and parachain as well as the keystore directory to `~/data` on the host system using the flag `-v $HOME/data:/data`.
That way the blockchain database files are not lost when and if the Docker container is removed and can be mounted back on next containers.

The docker container runs as an user with id 1000 and will try to access the mapped volume and the files it contains.
If the files are not owned by a user with id 1000 this will result in an error.
If that is the case, run `sudo chown -R 1000:1000 $HOME/data` to give the container access.

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Sync the Blockchain State

Before a collator can author blocks, the node needs to fully sync up with both the parachain and the relaychain.

> Depending on the size of the blockchain states, it may take a number of minutes to several hours maybe even days for the node to catch up.
> More details can be found on the [Polkadot network docs](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/maintain-guides-how-to-validate-kusama#synchronize-chain-data).

Reviewer: Don't give them false hopes.

```suggestion
Depending on the size of the blockchain states, it may take a number of hours to a couple of days for the node to catch up.
More details can be found on the [Polkadot network docs](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/maintain-guides-how-to-validate-kusama#synchronize-chain-data).
```

Author: I did not change that bit, I just copied it over from further down the text 😂

## Session Keys

Once the chain has fully synced, the collator needs to set sessions keys to begin collating on the network.
To check whether the account has already some session keys set, the RPC `hasKey(publicKey, keyType)` and `hasSessionKeys(sessionKeys)` in the `author` can be called.

![](/img/chain/author-hasKey.png)

:::note

> The session keys associate a collator node with an account on KILT.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The session keys associate a collator node with an account on the KILT blockchain.
```

  SS58 Address:     4srC1aowD94H9UH9xsnfv7XV6oHU6dhCymKYZHWKsdddaP29
```

The name of the file must be the *public* key prepended with `61757261` (HEX representation of `aura`) and without the `0x` prefix, while the content of the file has to be the secret phrase.

![](/img/chain/session-key-file.png)

For instance, with the keypair generated in the example, the session key file would be stored at the path `./keystores/61757261da3861a45e0197f3ca145c2c209f9126e5053fas503e459af4255cf8011d51010`.

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

Once a new session key is generated, the collator must then link that key to its own account in order to receive rewards for producing new blocks.
This operation is performed by submitting a signed extrinsic to the blockchain.

> Visit the [PolkadotJS Apps and connect to the peregrine network](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/?rpc=wss%3A%2F%2Fperegrine.kilt.io#/explorer) (websocket address: `wss://peregrine.kilt.io`).

Reviewer: peregrine or spiritnet

Author: Yeah that's the thing. The whole initial part is about peregrine, and then only mentions spiritnet in its section. I would argue that it might be best to actually just put a small disclaimer in the beginning saying that the operations should be first tested out on peregrine, and perhaps provide the WS endpoint for that, but then only use spiritnet in the step-by-step guide. What do you think?

Reviewer: would be cool to have a switch in the beginning of the doc and then we just show either peregrine or spiritnet data where appropriate. Like a Tab over the whole document. :D

Author: That would mean duplicating the same content twice, right? I would prefer to avoid that. But I will think about a better way to do that in a separate commit after addressing your comments and will ask you to review that.

Reviewer: It would be cool to have switch on the top that switches between peregrine & spiritnet and that just replaces the values everywhere. 
I couldn't find something like that... But yes. Definitely don't put a tab for the whole doc! :D

Author: Let me know what you think https://github.com/KILTprotocol/docs/pull/25/commits/fc55280db6c574298a4fe65caf4e65087efe346e

Reviewer: love it!

`Developer -> Extrinsics -> Submission`

1. Select the collator's KILT address as the extrinsic submitter (the *using the selected account* field)
2. Submit the following extrinsic: `session -> setKeys(keys, proof)`
    - `keys` -> the public session key (`0xda3861a45e0197f3ca145c2c209f9126e5053fas503e459af4255cf8011d51010` in the example above)
    - `proof` -> the proof of ownership. It can be set to `0x00`

![](/img/chain/session-setKeys.png)

Once the extrinsic is executed, the collator has linked the new session key to its account and can start receiving rewards for producing new blocks.

:::info

A session takes 600 blocks or around 120~ minutes

:::

## Join the collator candidates pool

:::warning

> These steps should be followed only once a collator node has successfully linked a session key to its address by following the steps above.

Reviewer: i would add:

> And the node is fully synchronized with the blockchain, so that it can build blocks.

:::

The maximum number of **active** collators is currently 16 on Peregrine and 17 on Spiritnet.

A collator staking amount must be:
- minimum 10,000 KILT tokens 
- maximum 200,000 KILT tokens.

The collator must call an extrinsic from the `parachainStaking -> joinCandidates(stake)` with the desired stake to join the candidate pool.

`Developer -> Extrinsics -> Submission`

1. Select the collator's KILT address as the extrinsic submitter (the *using the selected account* field)

> 2. Submit the following extrinsic: `parachainStaking -> joinCandidates(stake)`

Reviewer: We first select the extrinsic and set parameters!

```suggestion
2. Pick the following extrinsic: `parachainStaking -> joinCandidates(stake)`
```

3. Insert the staked KILT amount for the collator

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Sign and send the extrinsic

```

:::info

> A recent change in the blockchain metadata resulted in a change in the UI regarding how balances are shown. In the current version of PolkadotJS Apps, specifying 1 KILT requires adding 15 trailing `0`s. So, for instance, 1 KILT needs to be written as `1000000000000000`, while 10,000 KILT would be written as `10000000000000000000`.

Reviewer: A sentence per line! 😋 

```suggestion
A recent change in the blockchain metadata resulted in a change in the UI regarding how balances are shown.
In the current version of PolkadotJS Apps, specifying 1 KILT requires adding 15 trailing `0`s.
So, for instance, 1 KILT needs to be written as `1000000000000000`, while 10,000 KILT would be written as `10000000000000000000`.
```

:::

![](/img/chain/parachainStaking-joinCandidates.png)

> A collator can check the current top candidates to see the position and required staked amount to join the network. 

Reviewer: Maybe we should start to distinguish between collator candidates and active collators.

```suggestion
A collator candidate can check the current top candidates to see his position and required staked amount to become an active collator.
The 75 collator candidates with the highest stake are shown in the top candidate list.
```

`Developer -> Chain state -> Storage`

1. Selected state query: `parachainStaking -> topCandidates(): ParachainStakingSetOrderedSet`
2. Execute the query by pressing the "+" button on the right side

If the collator has enough self-stake and delegator stake it will be selected to collate.

> Once the collator has been chosen, it will be part of the `topCandidates()` set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A collator has been chosen, when he is part of the first 17 candidates in the `topCandidates()` set (16 for peregrine).
```

Author: I would refrain from putting actual numbers, as those need to be updated. Plus, we have mentioned few lines above that collators can check the minimum stake required to make in the active set, so I am not sure why we want to repeat that here.

Reviewer: yes that's also fine. But the TopCandidates are candidates and only the first N candidates will become collators. It reads like everyone in the list is a collator

Author: I would then remove this line altogether, as I think it does not bring anything new on the table.

A time period of two sessions must pass before the collator will be authoring blocks, e.g.
after the rest of current session and the entire next one.

![](/img/chain/session-validators.png)

### Change a Collator's Stake

A collator can increase/decrease their stake, always within the limits of the minimum and maximum allowed stake amounts.
The corresponding extrinsics for these operations are `parachainStaking -> candidateStakeMore(more)` and `parachainStaking -> candidateStakeLess(less)`.

![](/img/chain/parachainStaking.png)

## Monitoring

> It would be ideal if the host being monitored is not the host monitoring, a.k.a., if the monitoring process does not run on the same host as the collator process.

Reviewer: I think the comma is after i.e. [Had to duckduckgo that](https://www.wikihow.com/Use-i.e.-in-a-Sentence)

```suggestion
It would be ideal if the host being monitored is not the host monitoring i.e., the monitoring process does not run on the same host as the collator process.
```

Author: Yeah wanted to be a bit more informal here, but ok 🧐 It goes both before and after tho.

However, in cases of limited resources, the two can also co-exist on the same host.

The monitoring process collects two types of metrics: **Node Exporter metrics** and **blockchain metrics**.
The monitoring infrastructure can either be run as a local grafana cluster or as a [cloud-based solution](https://grafana.com/products/cloud/).

:::info

For cloud-based solutions, the prometheus process must be publicly accessible, e.g., via a reverse proxy.

:::

> 

Reviewer: A section that describes what will be installed would be good?

```suggestion

# What will be installed

The docker compose starts up to four containers:

* **Node Exporter**: The node exporter provides metrics from your host, like CPU, memory and storage usage, network traffic statistics etc.
* **prometheus**: Prometheus collects and stores metrics that it collected from the node exporter and your blockchain node
* **grafana (optional)**: Grafana is a website which shows the metrics and can send alerts on certain conditions
* **collator (optional)**: A KILT spiritnet node that is configured to as a collator
```

> ### Prerequisites

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Installation
```

Install the latest version of docker-compose from the [official docker-compose installation guide](https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/), then:

> 1. Clone or download the monitoring template from the [KILT chain repo](https://github.com/KILTprotocol/docs)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Clone [the repository](https://github.com/KILTprotocol/docs) or download [the monitoring template](https://github.com/KILTprotocol/docs/tree/master/collator).
```

2. Change directory to the above with ```cd docs/collator```
3. Edit the `.env` file and insert grafana admin and password
4. Depending on the installation type either:
  - run `docker-compose up -d` to install only prometheus and node exporter or 

>   - run `docker-compose up --profile grafana -d` to install prometheus through grafana or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - run `docker-compose up --profile grafana -d` to install node exporter, prometheus and grafana or
```

>   - run `docker-compose --profile collator --profile grafana up -d` to install prometheus **and** grafana with the collator 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - run `docker-compose --profile collator --profile grafana up -d` to install node exporter, prometheus, grafana and **a collator node**
```

    4. Enable certificate renewal by editing the crontab list ```crontab -e``` and appending ```0 5 * * * /usr/bin/certbot renew --quiet```
    5. Reload nginx after replacing the default nginx file with prometheus endpoint (if grafana cloud is chosen) or grafana endpoint (if grafana installed) by adding the following config snippet to `/etc/nginx/sites-enabled/default`
    ```
      location / {
          proxy_pass http://localhost:9090/;    #proxy_pass http://localhost:3000/;
      }
    ```
    6. Enable basic authentication by replacing the default password in `prometheus.yml` using  ``` htpasswd -nBC 10 "" | tr -d ':\n' ```

### Testing the Configuration
The configuration can be checked by visiting `https://localhost:3000` and authenticating with the username and password set in `.env` at step 3.

### Configuring Alert Notification Channel
Choose any of the supported notification channels and follow the [Grafana documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/alerting/old-alerting/notifications/) to receive alerts and notifications.

Overall, for monitoring we recommend the following stack:
- Prometheus
- Grafana
- Node exporter

> - Slack

Reviewer: I wouldn't recommend slack specifically.

```suggestion
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

:::info

The same process that includes generating and registering sessions keys and joining the collator candidate pool must be re-executed for Spiritnet.

:::

## Troubleshooting

> There are a few things that can checked to make sure everything is setup correctly.

Reviewer: i would keep this note:

```
Check that your node is fully synced with the relaychain & parachain. (best and finalised block number is equal to the one shown in the polkadot apps & on subscan)
```

Author: It is, just a few points below, precisely point 3. I just switched the points around as to first suggest to check if everything is good, and if not, rule out potential causes before trying to upgrade the hardware. I think it is a more logical flow to follow.

Reviewer: ok!

If, from any network explorer, e.g., the one offered by PolkadotJS Apps, the collator's account is shown next to some of the blocks, then the collator is correctly producing blocks and getting rewarded for it.

> If the logs print the message that starts with a :gift: emoji it indicates that the collator setup is correct but that the blocks produced are not included by the relaychain. This typically signals some issues about the node hardware or connectivity.

Reviewer: This is only true if the first step failed. That's the reason i added numbers. It's like if n-1 failed check n.

```suggestion
If the logs print the message that starts with a :gift: emoji it indicates that the collator setup is correct but that the blocks produced are not included by the relaychain. This typically signals some issues about the node hardware or connectivity.
```

Author: So after which point you would include this?

Reviewer: i think the order is fine. it wasn't clear for me that this only matters when the first point was false.
It sounds like having the 🎁 in logs is something bad. Like it means that the block wasn't submitted.
